Jehovah, the God of love, hates.
That’s quite a statement, isn’t it?
How can that be?
Well, look at the first part of today’s text
at Psalm 97:10:
“O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad.”
Our God expects us
to “hate what is bad” because he does that.
And the reason for this is explained
in the first two verses of Psalm 97.
Verse 1 begins:
“Jehovah has become King!”
Verse 2 concludes:
“Righteousness and justice
are the foundation of his throne.”
And in the Scriptures,
righteousness refers to what is right
according to God’s standard of right and wrong.
And here are
just a few examples in the Bible
of the things that Jehovah
says are wrong and that he hates.
At Psalm 11:5 it says:
“[Jehovah] hates anyone who loves violence.”
At Isaiah 61:8 it says:
“I, Jehovah, . . .
hate robbery and unrighteousness.”
At Malachi 2:16 it states:
“‘I hate divorce,’ says Jehovah.”
The context is talking
about treacherous, unscriptural divorce.
And then there’s Proverbs chapter 6,
let’s turn in our Bibles to that.
Proverbs the 6th chapter starting with verse 16:
“There are six things that Jehovah hates;
“yes, seven things that he detests:
“Haughty eyes, a lying tongue,
“and hands that shed innocent blood,
“a heart plotting wicked schemes,
“and feet that run quickly to evil,
“a false witness who lies with every breath,
and anyone
sowing contentions among brothers.”
So, yes,
the God of love hates,
and so does Jesus.
Look at what was said of God’s Son
at Hebrews 1:9.
Hebrews 1:9:
“You loved righteousness,
and you hated lawlessness.
“That is why God, your God,
“anointed you with the oil of exultation
more than your companions.”
Well, if we desire Jehovah’s blessing,
then we also must hate what is bad
—that is, have an intense aversion,
a strong abhorrence for what God hates.
And having that godly hate
serves as a powerful protection for us
not to get involved in any bad practices.
But exactly what do these include?
Well, we just read in Proverbs
seven categories of hateful things.
They’re basic,
but they cover virtually all types of wrongs.
Haughty eyes and wicked schemes
are sins committed in thought.
A lying tongue
and a false witness are sinful words.
Hands that shed blood
and feet that run to evil
and someone who produces
contentions among brothers
—why, those are all wicked deeds.
And interestingly, the writer,
when he increased the number
of things Jehovah hates from six to seven
—that suggests that this list
is not intended to be complete,
because humans keep thinking up bad things.
And as an example,
consider the escalating trend toward the use
of more and more explicit sex
and graphic violence
that appear today
in advertising and entertainment
—from clothing ads to movies.
Now how much of that can we be exposed to
before it affects us mentally and morally?
It makes me think of the five-second rule.
Have you ever heard of that?
It’s the so-called rule
that some people say applies
to food that’s dropped on the floor.
That it’s OK to eat it
if you pick it up in five seconds or less
because bacteria
won’t have time to contaminate it.
But is that really true?
Not according to research
done last year at Rutgers University.
It was concluded that no matter how fast
you pick up food that falls on the floor,
you will pick up bacteria with it
—sometimes in less than one second.
Of course,
the longer the food sits on the floor,
the more bacteria it collects.
So if you eat food dropped on the floor,
you’re taking a chance
no matter how long it sat there.
And you should know
that a clean-looking floor
is not necessarily clean.
So if food falls on the floor,
when in doubt, throw it out.
But how does this relate to our discussion
of hating the things that Jehovah hates?
Well, how long does it take
for an immoral, violent, or satanic image
to burn a thought into our mind?
Something we see
on a billboard, in a magazine,
on television, at a movie, on the Internet
—Is there a five-second rule
for this sort of thing?
Should we think
that as long as we look at it only briefly,
it will not contaminate us?
Well, let’s use five seconds as an example
and see how long that is,
and you can judge for yourselves.
Don’t take your eyes off the screen.
Now, do you think at lunch today
you’ll be able to remember that picture,
a delicious looking chocolate ice-cream sundae
with syrup and a cherry on top?
Well, don’t expect to see it on the lunch line.
Now, let’s try four seconds.
What about this image?
Will this cute baby’s face come back
to your mind tomorrow? next week?
Now, watch the screen for three seconds.
Will this image stick in your mind?
Next month, next year,
do you think you
will be able to remember Jesus on a white horse,
riding off to the battle of Armageddon?
Now, you saw each picture
for only a few seconds,
and yet scientists say the human brain
can process images in even less time
—in a split second, in the blink of an eye.
So think how much processing our brain can do
in several seconds or minutes or longer.
Now, the pictures we just looked at
were all wholesome images.
But what if there had been
a pornographic picture from the Internet?
a sexually explicit
or graphically violent scene from a movie?
or some spiritistic gore in a video game?
If we gaze at something that Jehovah hates,
we’re taking a chance
—no matter how long we look at it—
and that graphic image
can come back to mind
again and again to haunt us.
Now, we may not be able to avoid
all of this 100 percent
because of the wicked world that surrounds us,
but we certainly don’t have to linger
in looking at these things,
and we do not want to seek them out.
And we need to realize
that what we might think is a clean movie
is not necessarily clean.
So like food that has fallen on the floor,
when in doubt, we throw it out.
So we need to detest
the immorality, the violence,
the spiritistic practices of Satan’s world.
In other words, hate every practice
that violates Jehovah’s righteous standards.
Now, even if we hate what is bad,
we may struggle because we live
in a world that caters to the flesh,
and we have our own sinful nature to control.
So how do we develop
the needed hatred for what is bad?
First, we strengthen our desire
to please Jehovah in everything we do.
Then, we meditate on what it is that he loves
and what it is that he hates.
And finally, we convince ourselves
of the badness of the things that he hates
by considering how disgusting the results are
for those who practice them.
And one more thing,
if we struggle with this,
then we pray earnestly to Jehovah
to help us strengthen our powers of self-control.
Well, you can be sure
that as our day’s text, Psalm 97:10,
says of those
who imitate Jehovah and hate what is bad:
“He is guarding
the lives of his loyal ones,
[and] he rescues them
from the hand of the wicked.”